MSC2010: Add client-side spoilers (#2010)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2010-spoilers.md

# MSC 2010: Proposal to add client-side spoilers

> Sometimes you are talking about e.g. a new movie and want to discuss the plot without spoiling others. Or you are talking in e.g. some mental health community where, due to triggers, some content shouldn't be immediately visible to everybody. For this the content is hidden and then revealed once interacted somehow (e.g. a click / hover).

Reviewer: Would be cool to add context about the need for this. In our case, Discord has spoilers and we want to bridge them but it has potential as a Matrix feature on it's own.

## Proposal

> This proposal adds a new attribute, `data-mx-spoiler`, to the `<span>` tag. If the attribute is present the contents of the span tag should be rendered as a spoiler. Optionally, you can specify a reason for the spoiler by setting the attribute string.

Reviewer: For readability, could you add that this applies to the formatted_body of a `m.room.message` `m.text`

> For example:  

Reviewer: Usually examples are given as full event json blocks surrounded by triple backticks, rather than just the example value. I realise it might be a bit overkill but it's much much more readable :)

`Hello there, the movie was <span data-mx-spoiler>awesome</span>` for a spoiler without reason and `Hey <span data-mx-spoiler="movie">the movie was awesome</span>` for a spoiler with the reason "movie".

> The plain-text fallback could be rendered as `(Spoiler: <content>)` and `(Spoiler for <reason>: <content>)` respectively.

Reviewer: Could you add more detail about how the spoiler would be rendered on a compliant client?

In such cases it would make sense to add a spoiler so that only those who have seen the movie or
don't mind spoilers read the content.  
Another example would be e.g. in mental health communities where certain people have certain
triggers. People could put talking about abuse or thelike into a spoiler, to not accidentally
trigger anyone just reading along the conversation.  
Furthermore this is helpful for bridging to other networks that already have a spoiler feature.

To render the spoiler the content is hidden and then revealed once interacted somehow
(e.g. a click / hover).

## Proposal
This proposal is about adding a new attribute to the `formatted_body` of messages with type
`m.room.message` and msgtype `m.text`.

It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-spoiler`, to the `<span>` tag. If the attribute is present the
contents of the span tag should be rendered as a spoiler. Optionally, you can specify a reason for
the spoiler by setting the attribute string. It could be rendered, for example, similar to this:

![Spoiler rendering idea](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2433620/59299700-95063480-8c8d-11e9-9348-3e2c8bc94bdc.gif)

> The plain-text fallback could be rendered as `(Spoiler: <content>)` and

Reviewer 2: It's somewhat unsatisfying that the plain-text fallback includes the spoiler content in the clear.  An alternative implementation might be to upload a text file to the media repo, and the plain-text fallback would include a link to the repo on the sender's HS (e.g. `(Spoiler: https://example.com/_matrix/media/v1/download/example.com/foo )`).  That seems somewhat non-ideal as well, but at least it preserves the semantics of the spoiler.

Author: Not sure this is a too good idea (because it is clunky), as clients who aren't aware of spoilers but do rich formatting (e.g. the lazy way and just display the html) would also just render the spoiler contents.

Also, noticed as an after-thought, that there is nowhere a specification for all the other tags how their cleartext fallback should look like, rather unsure on this one.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: > as clients who aren't aware of spoilers but do rich formatting (e.g. the lazy way and just display the html) would also just render the spoiler contents.

You could reverse the meanings of the `data-mx-spoiler` attribute and the tag contents, so that the `data-mx-spoiler` attribute is the spoiler text, and the tag contents is the reason.  e.g. `Hey <span data-mx-spoiler="the movie was awesome">movie</span>`.  Though that would mean that clients that don't support the spoiler attribute will never see the spoiler.  Or you can stick both the spoiler and the reason in tags, and put a fallback link (like the above suggestion for the plain text fallback).  e.g. `Hey <span data-mx-spoiler="the movie was awesome" data-mx-spoiler-reason="movie">(Spoiler for movie: https://...)</span>`

And I bet you though this would be a simple proposal to do. :stuck_out_tongue:

> Also, noticed as an after-thought, that there is nowhere a specification for all the other tags how their cleartext fallback should look like, rather unsure on this one.

Personally, I think it's fine, since it's given as a suggestion rather than a "MUST".

Author: with the semantics of html the `<span data-mx-spoiler="reason">content</span>` seems to fit best, as the metadata, the reason, is just an attribute, while the actual content is, well, the content.

Will type something up for media files tomorrow!

Reviewer: *chimes in*

I think media files should be optional, purely because it's a bit of a faff (also, some bridges might end up showing you url previews :Z). However it's the best way I can see to achieve this.

Author: a bit later than a day, but done :D

`(Spoiler for <reason>: <content>)` respectively.

### Example
Without reason:
```
{
    "msgtype": "m.text",

>     "format": "org.matrix.custom.html",

Reviewer 3: Afaik html messages aren't part of the spec, so adding an extension which effectively depends on them seems to be a bit of a causality violation.

That said, it seems a shame to block this sensible msc on that can of worms, and presumably this will apply equally well to whatever happens there...

Reviewer 2: HTML messages are part of the spec: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.5.0#m-room-message-msgtypes

Reviewer 3: urgggggggggh and they are specced with `org.matrix.custom.html` :/

Reviewer 4: yes, because after 4 or 5 years there's no going back. It was added under the "we should really, really, ***really*** replace this soon" banner

    "body": "Hello there, the movie was (Spoiler: awesome)",
    "formatted_body": "Hello there, the movie was <span data-mx-spoiler>awesome</span>"
}
```
With reason:
```
{
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "format": "org.matrix.custom.html",
    "body": "Hey (Spoiler for movie: the movie was awesome)",
    "formatted_body": "Hey <span data-mx-spoiler="movie">the movie was awesome</span>"
}
```

## Tradeoffs
Instead of making this an attribute, an entirely new tag could be introduced (e.g. `<mx-spoiler>`),
however that wouldn't be HTML-compliant.

Instead of limiting the proposed `data-mx-spoiler` attribute only to the `<span>`-tag it could be
added to all tags, however it might make implementations for clients more complicated.

> Clients would have to come up with a way how to input spoilers. This could be done, for example,

Reviewer 2: This seems to me like it should go under "Potential issues" rather than "Tradeoffs".

Author: Good catch!

AFAIK not too important for a spec, though, as using markdown to html conversion isn't speced anyways?

by adding a custom markdown tag (like discord does), so that you do `Text ||spoiler||`, however
that doesn't take a spoiler reason into account.

## Potential issues
Depending on context it might make sense to put other events, such as `m.image`, into spoilers,
too. This MSC doesn't address that at all. Using

> `<span data-mx-spoiler><img src="mxc://server/media"></span>` seems rather sub-optimal for that.

Reviewer 5: So what *should* happen if a client receives that?

Author: When a client receives that it should spoiler that inline-image. That section explains how the spoiler functionality only exists for `m.text` and `m.emote` messages, not for e.g. `m.image`

Reviewer 5: Ah I see, this is explicitly for inline images. Got it.

# MSC 2010: Proposal to add client-side spoilers
Sometimes, while you want to put text into a spoiler to not have people accidentally read things that they don't want to see.

For example, when discussing a new movie or a TV series, not everyone might have watched it yet.
In such cases it would make sense to add a spoiler so that only those who have seen the movie or
don't mind spoilers read the content.  
Another example would be e.g. in mental health communities where certain people have certain

> triggers. People could put talking about abuse or thelike into a spoiler, to not accidentally

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
triggers. People could put talking about abuse or the like into a spoiler, to not accidentally
```

trigger anyone just reading along the conversation.  
Furthermore this is helpful for bridging to other networks that already have a spoiler feature.

To render the spoiler the content is hidden and then revealed once interacted somehow
(e.g. a click / hover).

## Proposal
This proposal is about adding a new attribute to the `formatted_body` of messages with type
`m.room.message` and msgtype `m.text`.

It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-spoiler`, to the `<span>` tag. If the attribute is present the
contents of the span tag should be rendered as a spoiler. Optionally, you can specify a reason for
the spoiler by setting the attribute string. It could be rendered, for example, similar to this:

> ![Spoiler rendering idea](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2433620/59299700-95063480-8c8d-11e9-9348-3e2c8bc94bdc.gif)

Reviewer 2: The image should be committed to the repo, rather than linking to another site, in case GitHub ever vanishes/becomes evil.

### Example
Without reason:
```
{
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "format": "org.matrix.custom.html",
    "body": "Hello there, the movie was [spoiler](mxc://someserver/somefile)",
    "formatted_body": "Hello there, the movie was <span data-mx-spoiler>awesome</span>"
}
```
With reason:
```
{
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "format": "org.matrix.custom.html",
    "body": "Hey [Spoiler for movie](mxc://someserver/somefile)",
    "formatted_body": "Hey <span data-mx-spoiler="movie">the movie was awesome</span>"
}
```

## Tradeoffs
Instead of making this an attribute, an entirely new tag could be introduced (e.g. `<mx-spoiler>`),
however that wouldn't be HTML-compliant.

Instead of limiting the proposed `data-mx-spoiler` attribute only to the `<span>`-tag it could be
added to all tags, however it might make implementations for clients more complicated.

## Potential issues
Depending on context it might make sense to put other events, such as `m.image`, into spoilers,
too. This MSC doesn't address that at all. Using
`<span data-mx-spoiler><img src="mxc://server/media"></span>` seems rather sub-optimal for that.

This MSC doesn't take HTML block elements into account.

> Clients would have to come up with a way how to input spoilers. This could be done, for example,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Clients would have to come up with a way to input spoilers. This could be done, for example,
```

don't mind spoilers read the content.  
Another example would be e.g. in mental health communities where certain people have certain
triggers. People could put talking about abuse or the like into a spoiler, to not accidentally
trigger anyone just reading along the conversation.  
Furthermore this is helpful for bridging to other networks that already have a spoiler feature.

To render the spoiler the content is hidden and then revealed once interacted somehow
(e.g. a click / hover).

## Proposal
This proposal is about adding a new attribute to the `formatted_body` of messages with type
`m.room.message` and msgtype `m.text`.

It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-spoiler`, to the `<span>` tag. If the attribute is present the
contents of the span tag should be rendered as a spoiler. Optionally, you can specify a reason for
the spoiler by setting the attribute string. It could be rendered, for example, similar to this:

![Spoiler rendering idea](images/2010-spoiler-example.gif)

To preserve the semantics of a spoiler in the plaintext fallback it is recommended to upload the contents of the spoiler
as a text file and then link this: `[Spoiler](mxc://someserver/somefile)` and

> `[Spoiler for reason](mxc://someserver/somefile)` respectively.

Reviewer 7: 1. As a client author, I'm not extremely happy to use two separate mechanisms for the purpose that can be covered by one uniform solution. Can we use only the text file and cover both the formatted and the unformatted case with that (maybe different files if a markup is involved inside the spoiler)?
2. In the provided solution, you actually use markdown inside the plain body, and people has been complaining at least in #quotient pretty consistently that markdown becomes a sort of admitted markup inside the plain body. Besides, the word "Spoiler" will clash with localisation efforts: think of a Riot user who uses it in Russian but speaks English, then his readers will see "Спойлер" (or whichever translation chosen) in the same unfortunate way we now see translations of "In reply to", effectively leaking information about the author's locale. So in the absence of reason, can we just keep the link, and only use markdown to decorate the reason when it exists?

Reviewer 4: "In reply to" being translated is a bug on the client-side fwiw. I do agree that we shouldn't be using Markdown here though, and definitely should not continue the trend of English-only strings in the spec.

Author: 1. the problem with using the text file in formatted body is that it doesn't render / look nearly as nicely. The problem with having the spoilered text in the plain body is that it destroys the semantics of the spoiler, which is why this solution was chosen

2. AFAIK there is no markdown for spoiler, do you have any suggestion? Ideally the client will support the formatted body anyways, yielding the fallback unneeded

Reviewer 7: On (2), I meant the Markdown notation of using square brackets for the text, followed by URL in parentheses, to decorate the reason as a hyperlink.

I understand it's a lost battle to put something with semantics of _hidden_ text into _plain_ text. Still, we haven't specced Markdown as a standard lightweight markup for the plain body so I can't just let this in. Which is why I proposed the idea of an external reference to bytes in the plain body (which, admittedly, is heavier and less compatible than throwing in a bunch of brackets but on the backdrop of having to upload and refer to a file looks pretty minor).

Or what if we don't spec the fall-back for reason in the plain body, saying that full compat with minimal/old clients is not feasible? Basically, the spec would mandate using a URL to the file with the spoiler but explicitly refrain from defining the way clients are supposed to put a reason next to it? Then, if some client would prefer to use, say, the Slack style (`<http://example.com|Text>`) for the purpose it would still be just fine.

Author: Aren't specced fallbacks already optional? E.g. if you use the html editor in riot the body just strips all html tags, without converting them to markdown

Are you suggesting this MSC should propose to have the URLs for fallback but leave it up to client writers if they follow that and how to present it?

Reviewer 7: Returned to this too late; anyway, after thinking about possible alternatives I have to admit that the proposed way is probably the least problematic.

Instead of limiting the proposed `data-mx-spoiler` attribute only to the `<span>`-tag it could be
added to all tags, however it might make implementations for clients more complicated.

Alternatively the [details](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/details) tag could
be used. This, however, is a block element, and the spoilers are span elements. Furthermore
semantically there is a slight difference: with the details tag you hide something for a person
as it uses up a lot of screen space, while with a spoiler you hide something as a person might not
want to see it.

## Potential issues
Depending on context it might make sense to put other events, such as `m.image`, into spoilers,
too. This MSC doesn't address that at all. Using
`<span data-mx-spoiler><img src="mxc://server/media"></span>` seems rather sub-optimal for that.

This MSC doesn't take HTML block elements into account.

Clients would have to come up with a way to input spoilers. This could be done, for example,
by adding a custom markdown tag (like discord does), so that you do `Text ||spoiler||`, however
that doesn't take a spoiler reason into account.

## Security considerations

> The spoiler reason needs to be properly escaped when rendered.

Reviewer 7: Separately for HTML and Markdown, moreover :-\

Author: As the spoiler itself can contain formatting, not mroe escaping than you need to do already is required. In the formatted body cleartext segments are html escaped, and if someone uses markdown syntax in the body you can escape that one, if wanted. No new addition here

Reviewer 7: Ok, yes, almost. I have to remember that the reason is used inside Markdown brackets and escape the closing bracket.

Author: The user already does that when inputting a spoiler that will be converted, though? Whatever markdown format you chose, may it be `||reason|spoiler text||`, the user will have to escape that correctly and then you can just toss that into the `body`? The suggestion for fallback here seems to make most sense for e.g. bridges looking into how to send spoilers
